---
title: "Letter to a Gender Critic"
date: 2019-05-09T07:24:51+01:00
draft: true
---
Dear...

You had wanted to know how, in the fact of the manifest absurdities of the "gender metaphysics" of trans rights activists, I could continue to maintain my belief in the essential justice and reasonableness of their demands. You know that I am not much inclined to think what others think. You also know that I have made some effort, in the past, to read the militant theoreticians of the feminist second wave, and profess a continued admiration for the writings of Andrea Dworkin. It is not through simple conformism or outright ignorance that I have arrived at my stance on this question, which is vehemently opposed to yours. For me, support for trans rights and recognition of trans identity are conjunctural necessities: they are dictated by the logic of the moment, as I see it. For you, that same moment is a moment of derangement: you feel that we are living in a time in which logic has gone dangerously awry, and a destructive animus runs wild. Where I see the widespread denunciation of TERFs as justifiable vituperation against an enemy, you see it as a manifestation of needless and self-propelling cruelty. This is, in a classic sense, a differend: there is a war, as Leonard Cohen said, between the ones who say there is a war, and the ones who say there isn't.

Let's begin with the question of the "enemy". It's reasonable to ask what desire produces the figure of the enemy, what those who look for enemies are really seeking after. Girard and Schmitt, in their different ways, see the production of enemies as essential to the maintenance of collective identity: the scapegoat, who bears away the antagonisms which cannot be resolved within the community, or the existential menace against whom we can all agree to be united. But there is another definition of the enemy which I take from Burroughs, who held the notion of community in no elevated regard. Burroughs describes an enemy as someone who seeks to impose conditions under which it would be unbearable to live. This enemy does not kill maliciously and directly, but is driven by its own need for order to establish zones of control in which free life is impossible. In intimate life, the "coercively controlling" partner is an enemy in just this sense. In public life, the "moral majority" performs a similar role, in the name of defending the health of the social body. Here it is the enemy himself who produces "enemies", through a Girardian or Schmittian nomination of those whose lives must be suppressed in order that the community might live.
